# Advancedform\_XH

Advancedform\_XH facilitates creating your own mail forms for
integration to CMSimple\_XH. It's possible use ranges from customized
contact forms to complex ordering or booking forms. Even complex forms
can be constructed by using the form editor, so you don't have to write
any HTML, CSS or PHP, if the basic form functionality is enough for your
needs. Advanced customization is available through the template resp.
hook system.

Advancedform\_XH is [hosted on
Github](https://github.com/cmb69/advancedform_xh) where you can get new
releases, file bug reports etc. Support is available in the
[CMSimple\_XH Forum](https://cmsimpleforum.com/).

  - [Requirements](#requirements)
  - [Installation](#installation)
  - [Settings](#settings)
  - [Usage](#usage)
      - [Mail form administration](#mail-form-administration)
      - [Mail form editor](#mail-form-editor)
      - [Using the mail form](#using-the-mail-form)
      - [Replacing the built in mail form](#replacing-the-built-in-mail-form)
      - [Template system](#template-system)
      - [Hooks](#hooks)
      - [Demo forms](#demo-forms)
  - [Limitations](#limitations)
  - [License](#license)
  - [Credits](#credits)

## Requirements

Advancedform\_XH is a plugin for CMSimple\_XH. It requires a UTF-8
encoded version and PHP â‰¥ 5.3.0.

## Installation

The installation is done as with many other CMSimple\_XH plugins. See
the [CMSimple\_XH
wiki](http://www.cmsimple-xh.org/wiki/doku.php/installation) for further
details.

1.  Backup the data on your server.
2.  Unzip the distribution on your computer.
3.  Upload the whole directory advancedform/ to your server into
    CMSimple\_XH's plugins directory.
4.  Set write permissions to the subdirectories config/, css/,
    languages/ and to the plugin's data folder.
5.  Protect Advancedform\_XH's data folder against direct access by any
    means your webserver provides. .htaccess files for Apache servers
    are already distributed in the default data folder. Note that the
    subfolders css/ and js/ must not deny public access.
6.  Switch to Advancedform in the back-end to check if all requirements
    are fulfilled.

## Settings

The plugin's configuration is done as with many other CMSimple\_XH
plugins in the website's back-end. Select "Advancedform" from "Plugins".

You can change the default settings of Advancedform\_XH in "Config".
Hints for the options will be displayed when hovering over the help icon
with your mouse. The setting "php\_extension" could provide additional
security with regard to the template and the hook system, if enabled.
However, some of the demo forms don't work in this case.

Localization is done in "Language". You can translate the character
strings to your own language, or customize them according to your needs.

The look of Advancedform\_XH can be customized in "Stylesheet". The
upper part contains the styling of the forms displayed in the front-end.
The mail form is displayed as a table with two columns. The left column
shows the labels, the right colum the fields. You can simply adjust the
styles for the classes "div.advfrm-mailform td.label" and
"div.advfrm-mailform td.field". You can style individual forms by
selecting "form\[name=FORM\_NAME\]", and even individual fields by
selecting "\#advfrm-FORM\_NAME-FIELD\_NAME". If you prefer a one column
layout, you have to use the [template system](#template-system).

The lower part of the stylesheet contains the styling of the mail form
administration and the form editor. If you want to style the property
dialogs to fit to your template, you should consider to add jQueryUI
theming support to your template. How this can be done is explained in
the [CMSimple\_XH
forum](http://www.cmsimpleforum.com/viewtopic.php?f=29&t=3435&start=2).

Only the first part of the stylesheet above the line

    /* END OF MAIL CSS */

will be included inline to sent HTML mails. So put all style information
that is appropriate for the mails to the top of the stylesheet.

## Usage

### Mail form administration

In the back-end under "Mail Forms" you'll find the list of all defined
mail forms. You can add and import new forms and edit, delete, copy and
export existing ones. To the right of the mail form is the script code
needed to show the according form on a page. Just copy the code and
paste it to the desired page.

### Mail form editor

The mail form editor allows you to construct your mail forms. The
details are explained in the following sections.

#### General form properties

In the upper part of the form editor you can edit the general form
properties.

  - **Name**:
    The name of the form may contain only alphanumeric characters and
    underscores. It must be unique for all defined forms. It is used to
    identify the form.
  - **Title**:
    The title of the form is used in the mails subject only.
  - **To (name)**:
    The name of the recipient of the mail.
  - **To (e-mail)**:
    The address of the recipient of the mail.
  - **CC**:
    The addresses of the CC recipients of the mail separated by
    semicolon.
  - **BCC**:
    The addresses of the BCC recipients of the mail separated by
    semicolon.
  - **CAPTCHA**:
    Whether a CAPTCHA should be included in the form.
  - **Store data**:
    Whether the submitted data should additionally be stored in a CSV
    file.
  - **Thanks page**:
    If empty, after sending the mail the sent information will be
    displayed. If set and if a sender e-mail address is entered, after
    sending the mail the visitor will be redirected to this page, and a
    confirmation mail with the sent information will be sent to him.

#### Form fields

In the lower part of the form editor you can edit the fields of the
form. Use the tool icons to add, delete or move fields.

  - **Name**:
    The name of the field may contain only alphanumeric characters and
    underscores. It must be unique for all defined fields of the current
    form. It is used to identify the field.
  - **Label**:
    The label that should be displayed next to the field.
  - **Type**:
    The field's type. Right to the selectbox is the property tool icon.
    Click it to open a dialog for editing the properties of the selected
    field type.
  - **Req.**:
    Whether the field is required, i.e. must be filled in by the
    visitor.

#### Field types

  - **Text**:
    A general text field.
  - **Sender (name)**:
    A field to enter the sender's name. This information will be
    included in the mail header. At most one field of type "Sender
    (name)" may be used for each form.
  - **Sender (e-mail)**:
    A field to enter the sender's e-mail address, which will be
    validated. This information will be used as From-Header field of the
    mail, and as To-Header field of the confirmation mail. At most one
    field of type "Sender (e-mail)" may be used for each form.
  - **E-mail**:
    A field to enter a general e-mail address, which will be validated
  - **Date**:
    A field to enter a date, which will be validated. In contemporary browsers,
    a datepicker is available.
  - **Number**:
    A field to enter a non-negative integer, which will be validated.
  - **Textarea**:
    A field to enter multi-line texts.
  - **Radiobutton**:
    A field to choose one of several options.
  - **Checkbox**:
    A field to choose any of several options.
  - **Selectbox**:
    A field to choose one of several options.
  - **Multi-Selectbox**:
    A field to choose any of several options.
  - **Password**:
    A field to enter a password.
  - **File**:
    A field to allow the visitor to upload a file as mail attachment.
    The attachment will not be sent back to the visitor in the
    confirmation mail.
  - **Hidden**:
    A hidden field. Hidden fields will never be shown to the visitor.
    They might be useful in combination with the template system and the
    hooks.
  - **Output**:
    A field to output arbitrary HTML.
  - **Custom**:
    A field that is validated against a given regular expression.

#### Field properties

The field properties are edited in a dialog that is opened by clicking
on the property icon. The different field types have different
properties that can be set.

  - **Size**:
    For text fields and such, the width of the field measured in
    characters. For selectboxes the height of the list. Use 1 for a
    dropdown box.
  - **Orientation**:
    For radiobuttons and checkboxes only: whether these should be
    displayed horizontally or vertically.
  - **Max. length**:
    The maximum number of characters that can be entered. For file
    fields it specifies the maximum file size in bytes.
  - **Cols**:
    The width of the textarea in characters.
  - **Rows**:
    The height of the textarea in characters.
  - **Default**:
    The default value of the field.
  - **Value**:
    The HTML for output fields.
  - **File types**:
    For file fields only: a comma separated list of permissible file
    extensions, e.g. *jpeg,jpg,png,gif,bmp* for images.
  - **Constraint**:
    For custom fields only: the regular expression the value should be
    checked against.
  - **Error message**:
    For custom fields only: the error message that should be displayed,
    if the value doesn't match the regular expression. Use *%s* to
    insert the label of the field into the message.

Radiobuttons, checkboxes and selectboxes allow to enter different
options. Use the tool buttons to add, delete and rearrange them. The
radiobuttons resp. checkboxes besides the options allow to specify these
as default(s). Use the tool "clear defaults" to reset them.

### Using the mail form

Edit the page, that you want to display a mail form, and insert the
plugin call:

    {{{PLUGIN:advancedform('FORM_NAME');}}}

It might be easiest to just copy\&paste the necessary code from the mail
form administration.

Now the mail form is ready to be used by the visitors of your site. They
can fill out the form and submit it. If they make any mistakes, e.g.
leaving empty an required field, entering an invalid e-mail address or
number or specifying a file that is larger than allowed, the form will
be displayed again with the already entered input, and with the errors
shown above, so the visitors can correct the mistakes and submit the
form again. It is not necessary that JavaScript is enabled in the
visitor's browser, but if it is, the first erroneous field field will be
focused. But none of the
field validations relies on JavaScript.

After successful submission of the form, an e-mail will be sent to the
receivers (To, CC and BCC) specified in the form editor. Then the sent
information is displayed to the visitor as confirmation, or, if a thanks
page is specified, the visitor will be redirected there, and a
confirmation mail will be sent to him. The thanks page/confirmation
feature will only work, if a required field of type "Sender (e-mail)" is
specified for the form.

Under CMSimple\_XH 1.6 and higher, attempts to send an email via
Advancedform are logged in CMSimple\_XH's system log (Settings â†’ Log
File).

Note, that it is possible to have multiple forms on a single page, which
can be sent independent from each other.

### Replacing the built in mail form

It is possible to replace CMSimple\_XH's built in mail form with a user
defined one. So just define the desired form, and enter its name in
Advancedform\_XH's language settings as "contact form". Now
CMSimple\_XH's mailform link will directly call your custom form. Note,
that an email address has to be configured for CMSimple\_XH to display
the mailform link, but its value is completely ignored by
Advancedform\_XH.

Alternatively create a hidden CMSimple\_XH page and insert the required
script code to call the form. Then you have to modify your template.
Just replace

    <?php echo mailformlink()?>

with

    <?php echo advancedformlink('PAGE_URL')?>

where PAGE\_URL should be the part of the URL of the page after the
question mark. It is possible to specify multiple advancedformlink()s
this way.

### Template system

The template system allows to build highly customized mail forms. Power
users, who need to create or alter mail forms frequently, might have a
look at the [Form Mailer](http://simplesolutions.dk/?Form_Mailer) by
Jerry Jakobsfeld, which is even more versatile than Advancedform\_XH.

If a file with the name FORM\_NAME.tpl(.php) is found in
Advancedform\_XH's data folder, it will be used as the template file.
Additionally the file css/FORM\_NAME.css, if it exists, will be included
as stylesheet in the CMSimple\_XH page and the top of this stylesheet
(delimited as for the plugin stylesheet) will be included in the e-mail.
And if a file js/FORM\_NAME.js exists, it will be included in the page,
too.

You can write the template file and it's stylesheet manually, but it
might be easiest to let Advancedform\_XH create a basic one in the mail
form administration. By default the generated template files will
display the form similar to the original Advancedform's one column
layout. If that's all you want, you're done.

If you want to adjust the styling, have a look at the generated files.
In the template file you can see it's simplistic structure. Everything
is encapsulated within \<div\>s for flexibility. Have a look at the
class of the container-divs. This is set to "break" by default, so every
field will start in a new row. Change it to "float" and the fields will
be put right beside each other. If you want to have the labels to the
left of the fields, just remove the comments in the prepared styles for
div.label and div.field.

A template file is basically a PHP file with one addition to the syntax:

    <?field FIELD_NAME?>

will output the field with the name FIELD\_NAME. Do not use any
additional characters such as whitespace except a single space between
field and FIELD\_NAME. This notation is actually a shorthand for

    <?php echo Advancedform_displayField('FORM_NAME', 'FIELD_NAME')?>

The template file will be evaluated in the context of CMSimple\_XH, so
any global variables, constants and functions are available to use.
However, it is not possible to alter any global variables (besides the
superglobals, what might disturb the system's functioning). And do not
call non-existent functions as this will cause the PHP interpreter to
fail. **Particularly you should be cautious using template files from
untrusted sources, as those could contain malicious code that might harm
your CMSimple\_XH installation.**

One particularly useful function might be

    Advancedform_focusField($form_name, $field_name)

that will set the focus to the given field.

### Hooks

The hooks are provided to give you even more flexibility, if you're able
to write some PHP code. Define them in a file FORM\_NAME.inc(.php) in
Advancedform\_XH's data folder. N.B.: this file will be include()'d, so
it has to be a proper PHP file. The hooks will be called from
Advancedform\_XH on certain occassions. They are not tied to the
template
    system.

    function advfrm_custom_field_default($form_name, $field_name, $opt, $is_resent)

This will be called before the form is sent to the browser. It gives the
opportunity to dynamically set default values for fields. Just return
the value you want to be used as the fields default value. If you don't
want to change the default value, just return NULL. The third parameter
is set for radiobuttons, checkboxes and selects only. It contains the
option, that is currently processed. Return TRUE to check the option,
FALSE to uncheck it, or NULL to use whatever was specified in the form
editor. The parameter $is\_resent tells whether the form was resent to
the browser after submission, because of validation errors. If this is
the case the values already entered by the user are sent back instead of
the default values specified in the form editor. You might consider to
return NULL in this case, to not overwrite the users input.

    function advfrm_custom_valid_field($form_name, $field_name, $value)

This will be called after the form was submitted, and gives the
opportunity to add additional validation to the field values. Return
TRUE, if the given $value is valid, otherwise return an error message,
which will be displayed to the user by Advancedform\_XH. For fields of
type "file", $value is the $\_FILES\[\] array belonging to the given
field.

    function advfrm_custom_mail($form_name, $mail, $is_confirmation)

This will be called after the $mail object is initialized with all
information and just before the mail is sent, and gives the opportunity
to alter the $mail object.
The parameter $form\_name specifies the currently processed form, and
the parameter $is\_confirmation specifies whether the $mail object
contains the information for the mail or the confirmation mail (i.e. the
response). If you want to suppress sending of the mail at all, just
return FALSE.

    function advfrm_custom_thanks_page($form_name, $fields)

This is called after the mail is sent, and can be utilized to switch to
a personalized thanks page. Return the query string (i.e. the part of
the URL of the page after the question mark) of the page you want to
redirect to. Returning an empty string will redirect to the thanks page
that's defined in the form editor. If no default thanks page is defined,
the sent information will be displayed. The parameter $fields is an
array holding the values of all submitted form fields.

### Demo forms

You should have a look at the shipped demo forms (see data/README for
further details) to see what can be done, and how it can be done.

**Caution:** of course you're free to use the demo forms as base for
your own forms. But as most of the demo forms use the template resp.
hook system, the result might not be as expected. Either remove the
unwanted template/hook files manually, or make a copy of the form in the
form administration and use this copy.

## Limitations

### Sending of Mails fails

If the sending of mails fails with the message "Could not instantiate
mail function", please check whether sending of mails via CMSimple\_XH's
built-in mailform works. If so, ask for support in the [CMSimple\_XH
Forum](http://cmsimpleforum.com/); otherwise ask the provider of your
webspace, if there are any restrictions on sending mails with PHP's
mail() function.

### jQuery

Advancedform\_XH *may* not work in installations with jQuery dependent
plugins/addons/templates that don't use jQuery4CMSimple, but import
their own jQuery library. This won't get fixed (as it's not possible to
fix it in all cases), because all developers are advised to use only
jQuery4CMSimple together with all their jQuery based code for
CMSimple\_XH.

### Alternative mailers

The original AdvancedForm supported different kinds of mailers. IMO this
is a rarely needed feature. Most webhosters will provide the possibility
to send mail via mail(), which should be easily configured and quite
acceptable for the purposes of Advancedform\_XH.

### Spam protection

The original Advancedform offered several features regarding spam
protection: IP blacklists, a badword filter, a XSS detection facility.
I'm not quite sure if these mechanisms are really the best way of
preventing spam. So I have implemented none of them (besides rendering
XSS harmless), but instead a CAPTCHA is available. This is only a
minimal text-based solution, but more comprehensive CAPTCHAs can be used
through an additional conforming CAPTCHA plugin. AFAIK currently the
only conforming CAPTCHA plugins are
[Recaptcha\_XH](http://3-magi.net/?CMSimple_XH/Recaptcha_XH) and
[Cryptographp\_XH](http://3-magi.net/?CMSimple_XH/Cryptographp_XH).

## License

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but *without any warranty*; without even the implied warranty of
*merchantibility* or *fitness for a particular purpose*. See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

Â© 2005-2010 Jan Kanters  
Â© 2011-2019 Christoph M. Becker

Czech translation Â© 2011-2012 Josef NÄ›mec  
Danish translation Â© 2012 Jens Maegard  
Estonian translation Â© 2012 Alo TÃ¤navots  
French translation Â© 2014 Patrick Varlet  
Slovak translation Â© 2012 Dr. Martin Sereday

## Credits

Advancedform\_XH is based on AdvancedForm Pro by Jan Kanters. Many
thanks to him for giving the permission to use his code for a
CMSimple\_XH conforming version, and to Holger and johnjdoe who
negotiated this permission.

The regular expression to check for a valid email address is by courtesy
of [Jan Goyvaerts](http://www.regular-expressions.info/email.html). Many
thanks for the great regular expression tutorial and the examples.

The plugin icon is designed by [Jack
Cai](http://www.doublejdesign.co.uk/). Many thanks for releasing it
under CC BY-ND.

This plugin uses free applications icons from
[Aha-Soft](http://www.aha-soft.com/). Many thanks for making these icons
freely available.

Many thanks to the community at the [CMSimple\_XH
forum](http://cmsimpleforum.com/) for tips, suggestions and testing.
Especially, I want to thank Tata for having the idea to let
Advancedform\_XH generate a basic template and stylesheet, and manu for
requesting the hooks and co-designing their API. And many thanks to
maeg, who allowed me to do some debugging on his server, so I was able
to find and fix a bug, which caused the sending of mails to fail on
several servers.

And last but not least many thanks to [Peter
Harteg](http://www.harteg.dk/), the "father" of CMSimple, and all
developers of [CMSimple\_XH](http://www.cmsimple-xh.org) without whom
this amazing CMS wouldn't exist.
